assets/literate/howTo/funcRange.md, before:

<!--This file was generated, do not modify it.-->
## Introduction

The range of a function $f$ is defined as the set $f(X) = {f(x) | x\in X}$, where $X$ is the domain of the function.
This tutorial will show how to to exploit interval arithmetic to give a rigorous estimate of the function range.

First, let's import all the packages we need

```julia:ex1
using IntervalArithmetic, Plots
```

## A first example

To begin with, let us compute the range of the function $f(x)=x^2+2x$ over the interval $X=[-5, 5]$.

```julia:ex2
f(x) = x^2+2x
X = -5..5

@show range_1_interval = f(X)

plot(f, -5, 5, leg=false)
plot!(IntervalBox(X, f(X)))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range1.svg")) # hide
```

\fig{range1}

As can be noticed, in this case we overestimate the range of the function. This is a common issue in interval
arithmetic and it is known as *dependency problem*. If a variable is present more than once in the expression,
then evaluating the function over an interval will produce  larger interval.
For this simple function, the problem can be solved with simple algebraic manipulation observing that
$$
x^2+2x=x^2+2x+1-1=(x+1)^2-1
$$

The variable $x$ is now present only once and no overestimation occurs, as the following code confirms

```julia:ex3
f1(x) = (x+1)^2-1
@show range_f = f1(X)

plot(f1, -5, 5, leg=false)
plot!(IntervalBox(X, f1(X)))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range2.svg")) # hide
```

 \fig{range2}

Despite for this simple example we could analytically solve the dependency problem, this is not possible in general.
The strategy to reduce overestimation is *divide and conquer*. The domain is divided into smaller intervals and the function is evaluated
at each interval. The process of partitioning the interval into smaller piecing is called "mincing" and `IntervalArithmetic` offers the function
`mince(X, N)` to partition the interval $X$ into $N$ intervals. This function returns an array of intervals. For example using 10 intervals

```julia:ex4
Xs = mince(X, 10)
Y = f.(Xs)
plot(f, -5, 5, leg=false)
plot!(IntervalBox.(Xs, f.(Xs)))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range3.svg")) # hide
```

\fig{range3}

Assuming the function $f$ is continuous, we can now compute the function range by taking the union of the computed intervals. This can be done using the function `reduce`

```julia:ex5
range_10_intervals = reduce(∪, Y)
overestimate_1_interval = (diam(range_1_interval)-diam(range_f))/diam(range_f)
overestimate_10_intervals = (diam(range_10_intervals)-diam(range_f))/diam(range_f)
@show overestimate_1_interval, overestimate_10_intervals

anim = @animate for i=1:50
    Xs = mince(X, i)
    plot(f, -5, 5, leg=false)
    plot!(IntervalBox.(Xs, f.(Xs)))
end
gif(anim, joinpath(@OUTPUT, "anim_range1.gif"), fps = 10)
nothing
```

\fig{anim_range1.gif}

As can be seen, the more intervals we use, the closer the range estimate will get to the actual range.
We are now ready to write our function `range(f, X, tol)` which estimates the range of a function $f$ over an interval $X$.
The function will take a third parameter an error tolerance `tol` and keep increasing the number of intervals until the relative change will become smaller than `tol`.
Denoting by $Y_i$ the range estimate using $i$ intervals, the relative change can be computed as $\frac{Y_{i-1}-Y_{i}}{Y_{i-1}}$.

```julia:ex6
function range(f, X, N, tol=0.01)

    Xs = mince(X, N)
    Ynext = f.(Xs)
    Ynext = reduce(∪, Ynext)
    err = tol+1

    while err > tol
        Yprev = Ynext
        N *= 2
        Xs = mince(X, N)
        Ynext = f.(Xs)
        Ynext = reduce(∪, Ynext)
        err = (diam(Yprev) - diam(Ynext))/diam(Yprev)
    end

    return (Ynext, N, err)
end
```

Now we are ready to compute the range of our function

```julia:ex7
Y, N, err = range(f, X, 3)
@show (Y, N, err)
plot(f, -5, 5, legend=false)
plot!(IntervalBox(X, Y))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range4.svg")) # hide
```

\fig{range4}

## A more challenging example (1D)

Now that we have developed our tool to estimate a function range, we are ready to test it with more challenging functions.
Let's estimate the range of the function $g(x) = -\sum_{k=1}^5kx\sin\left(\frac{k(x-3)}{3}\right)$ over the interval $X=[-10,10]$.

```julia:ex8
X = -10..10

g(x) = -sum([k*x*sin(k*(x-3)/3) for k in 1:5])

Y, N, err = range(g, X, 3)
@show (Y, N, err)
plot(g, -10, 10, legend=false)
plot!(IntervalBox(X, Y))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range5.svg")) # hide
```

\fig{range5}

```julia:ex9
anim = @animate for i in 2 .^(0:10)
    Xs = mince(X, i)
    plot(g, -10, 10, leg=false)
    plot!(IntervalBox.(Xs, g.(Xs)))
end
gif(anim, joinpath(@OUTPUT, "anim_range2.gif"), fps = 2) # hide
nothing # hide
```

\fig{anim_range2.gif}

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from  @ f9c5dfa27a823345c92d2ee85a54e327010e60da 🚀

assets/literate/howTo/funcRange.md, after:

<!--This file was generated, do not modify it.-->
## Introduction

The range of a function $f$ is defined as the set $f(X) = \{f(x) | x\in X\}$, where $X$ is the domain of the function.
This tutorial will show how to to exploit interval arithmetic to give a rigorous estimate of the function range.

First, let's import all the packages we need

```julia:ex1
using IntervalArithmetic, Plots
```

## A first example

To begin with, let us compute the range of the function $f(x)=x^2+2x$ over the interval $X=[-5, 5]$.

```julia:ex2
f(x) = x^2+2x
X = -5..5

@show range_1_interval = f(X)

plot(f, -5, 5, leg=false)
plot!(IntervalBox(X, f(X)))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range1.svg")) # hide
```

\fig{range1}

As can be noticed, in this case we overestimate the range of the function. This is a common issue in interval
arithmetic and it is known as *dependency problem*. If a variable is present more than once in the expression,
then evaluating the function over an interval will produce  larger interval.
For this simple function, the problem can be solved with simple algebraic manipulation observing that
$$
x^2+2x=x^2+2x+1-1=(x+1)^2-1
$$

The variable $x$ is now present only once and no overestimation occurs, as the following code confirms

```julia:ex3
f1(x) = (x+1)^2-1
@show range_f = f1(X)

plot(f1, -5, 5, leg=false)
plot!(IntervalBox(X, f1(X)))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range2.svg")) # hide
```

 \fig{range2}

Despite for this simple example we could analytically solve the dependency problem, this is not possible in general.
The strategy to reduce overestimation is *divide and conquer*. The domain is divided into smaller intervals and the function is evaluated
at each interval. The process of partitioning the interval into smaller piecing is called "mincing" and `IntervalArithmetic` offers the function
`mince(X, N)` to partition the interval $X$ into $N$ intervals. This function returns an array of intervals. For example using 10 intervals

```julia:ex4
Xs = mince(X, 10)
Y = f.(Xs)
plot(f, -5, 5, leg=false)
plot!(IntervalBox.(Xs, f.(Xs)))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range3.svg")) # hide
```

\fig{range3}

Assuming the function $f$ is continuous, we can now compute the function range by taking the union of the computed intervals. This can be done using the function `reduce`

```julia:ex5
range_10_intervals = reduce(∪, Y)
overestimate_1_interval = (diam(range_1_interval)-diam(range_f))/diam(range_f)
overestimate_10_intervals = (diam(range_10_intervals)-diam(range_f))/diam(range_f)
@show overestimate_1_interval, overestimate_10_intervals
```

Observe that increasing the number of intervals from 1 to 10 reduced the relative error from 25% to 5.5%.
The following animation shows how the range approximation improves doubling the number of intervals at each iteration.

```julia:ex6
anim = @animate for i in 0:10
    Xs = mince(X, 2^i)
    plot(f, -5, 5, leg=false, ylims=(-5, 40), xlims=(X.lo, X.hi), lw=2)
    plot!(IntervalBox.(Xs, f.(Xs)))
end
gif(anim, joinpath(@OUTPUT, "anim_range1.gif"), fps = 2)
nothing # hide
```

\fig{anim_range1.gif}

We are now ready to write our function `range(f, X, tol)` which estimates the range of a function $f$ over an interval $X$.
The function will take a third parameter an error tolerance `tol` and keep increasing the number of intervals until the relative change will become smaller than `tol`.

```julia:ex7
function range(f, X, N, tol=0.01)

    Xs = mince(X, N)
    Ynext = f.(Xs)
    Ynext = reduce(∪, Ynext)
    err = tol+1

    while err > tol
        Yprev = Ynext
        N *= 2
        Xs = mince(X, N)
        Ynext = f.(Xs)
        Ynext = reduce(∪, Ynext)
        err = (diam(Yprev) - diam(Ynext))/diam(Yprev)
    end

    return (Ynext, N, err)
end
```

Now we are ready to compute the range of our function

```julia:ex8
Y, N, err = range(f, X, 3)
@show (Y, N, err)
plot(f, -5, 5, legend=false)
plot!(IntervalBox(X, Y))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range4.svg")) # hide
```

\fig{range4}

## A more challenging example (1D)

Now that we have developed our tool to estimate a function range, we are ready to test it with more challenging functions.
Let's estimate the range of the function $g(x) = -\sum_{k=1}^5kx\sin\left(\frac{k(x-3)}{3}\right)$ over the interval $X=[-10,10]$.

```julia:ex9
X = -10..10

g(x) = -sum([k*x*sin(k*(x-3)/3) for k in 1:5])

Y, N, err = range(g, X, 3)
@show (Y, N, err)
plot(g, -10, 10, legend=false)
plot!(IntervalBox(X, Y))
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "range5.svg")) # hide
```

\fig{range5}

```julia:ex10
anim = @animate for i in 2 .^(0:10)
    Xs = mince(X, i)
    plot(g, -10, 10, leg=false, xlims=(X.lo, X.hi), ylims=(-60, 50), lw=2)
    plot!(IntervalBox.(Xs, g.(Xs)))
end
gif(anim, joinpath(@OUTPUT, "anim_range2.gif"), fps = 2) # hide
nothing # hide
```

\fig{anim_range2.gif}
